Yes, can you please introduce yourself please?
My name is Raquel Smith.
Can you tell us where you were born and yeah, can you tell us about what it was like growing up there as well?
I was born in Pakistan, near Jannamwala, Faisalabad.
District Faisalabad.
What was it like growing up there?
It was very nice. We had a small family.
My father was...
in England.
He was in army first and then he came to England to work.
While I was with my mother, grandmother and brother.
So we were living there happily.
How old was you when your father was travelling to England?
We came to this country when I was 14.
What do you remember? What kind of games did you play in Pakistan?
I remember playing in the streets, sort of an open place.
Because even in the houses we have a yard where we play together, children come around.
And we play in the streets as well.
In our time it was very safe to play there.
Have you got a favourite memory of your childhood?
My favourite memory could be my grandmother being there and friends coming around to play.
And we used to sit together and listen to grandmother's stories.
And having good fun really.
Because there was no TV or radio at that time.
Is there a certain story you can remember from your grandmother?
Not really. No.
I only remember just talking about different things.
And is there an event? An event that you remember?
An event or a gathering that really stands out to you that you had while you were still in Pakistan?
I remember Christmas times.
Because I'm Christian.
So Christmas time was a big thing.
And because my father was abroad, we were known as a well-off family.
And he would send money.
And Christmas time, all the people in our room nearby,
all the people in our room nearby,
would get together in our house and little presents were given to them.
And it would be really a joyful time.
Mixing with children.
And it wasn't a massive big presents.
It was small presents and some fruit given and things like that.
So we weren't spoiled or given large big things.
So then, you're 14 years old.
And you're travelling to the UK.
What made you decide to come to the UK?
It was my father and my titus over.
The mother, my brother and myself.
It was hard in a sense.
Mother was very excited.
She's meeting her husband and going abroad.
I don't understand why I wasn't happy.
Because I was leaving everything I knew behind, I think.
All the aunties, uncles, all the friends behind.
But it was good as well.
Happiness as well.
But still it was sad as well, deep down.
Leaving the country.
Was there anything you were expecting?
Did you have a vision inside your mind of what the UK was going to look like?
Not really, no.
Being 14 years old, it was quite a...
It was hard to just think why we have to leave and go.
And when we came here, going to the school was the biggest thing.
I didn't know the language.
Even though I went to school in Pakistan, but it was all in Urdu.
And we just started doing English at my age.
You start in class six, I think.
English.
And then...
I knew a bit to read and write.
But to speak, there was no chance.
Especially even if you can speak when you come here, accent and everything.
Really, it takes time.
I agree.
So that was a big, big superpower.
So then, so you travelled by plane, coming to the UK.
It was by plane?
Yeah, we came by plane.
Where did you...
Can you remember where you landed?
Heathrow.
Heathrow and straight to Newport.
I've been in Newport over 50 years now.
Wow.
That's amazing.
And was there any particular reason why your father was in Newport?
Or why you came to Newport?
Yeah, he was actually in Bradford because he had friends there.
And they were more, I think, industrial factories around there.
But he had a friend from Johnawalla, where we're from, in Wales.
And he invited him over from Bradford.
He said, come and join us here.
Now your family is coming.
Come here so we can meet together.
So that was the reason.
And of course, you were...
Is there a certain memory that really sticks out to you when you arrived into Newport?
Or around the time that you were settling in Newport?
Yes, there are a lot of memories.
The particular one is changing of clothes.
From Pakistani clothes.
We had to wear English clothes, like in school, skirt and things.
That was very daunting.
It was very strange after being covered.
We had to wear those clothes.
That was one of the memories that really sticks out.
Yeah, that's something.
That's the first time I'm hearing that actually.
Someone mentioning that.
Because you wouldn't think as much how clothes do play a factor.
Because that's what you're wearing at home.
That's what you're wearing when you play everywhere.
Everyone, you know, Pakistanis, they're coming here.
Yeah.
It's not everyone.
It's just my father was...
I think you got to mix with the culture.
And being a Christian, we didn't have restrictions like you got to be covered.
Even though in Pakistan there was no difference.
Because that's what you call national costume.
Here, to him, national costume was what he wanted.
And to him, it was one of the käyttig.
Now, many of us are dressed like that.
So, we thought we should dress like this.
So, it was kind of like, not like the...
This is like wearing clothes, old European outfit.
Thank you very much for your time.
written down. They would write down for me and there was no other help around.
So how about friends? Did you start kind of growing friends as well or the more that you
were being settled inside of Newport? Yes, we made friendship. My main friends were Pakistani
people because of the language and some of them are still my friends. We kept on
as family friends after. Where in Newport have you lived actually, since you've been here for 50 years?
I live around the Hanpost area, you know, Ruska road. We moved around a bit.
I think very first time we came, the first home was in Pill, my father was there and then
from there we moved to Mendy.
lived in the main area and then the rest of my life I've been in the hand post area, up
and down streets.
Yeah, because you're quite high up now actually, going up the hand post.
Does that mean that you used to go to Bellevue Park and things like that as well?
Yeah, I lived at Bellevue Park and still do.
It's one of the things, really memories are there.
Because from school we would walk to the Bellevue Park before we go home.
I went to Dufferin High.
So Bellevue Park is quite an important park in my life.
So after coming here, did any of your friends from Pakistan or even family, other family
members join you in Newport?
No.
Because it wasn't easy to get visas and things.
How about you?
Have you travelled to Pakistan?
Have you been able to?
My mum and my husband used to go more often.
But my husband hasn't come yet.
He came too early.
But when I got married I went back.
I did not go before that.
Yes, we got a big connection at this moment in Pakistan.
We started a charity.
There is an inner village nearby.
Where I'm from.
Which is running a school for poor children in a small village.
And they needed a church as well.
So they built up a church.
A school is our responsibility.
I got all the community here involved in it.
And it's going really well.
So we got a big connection there.
We go up and down.
And with the media now, we're on the video calls.
And so it's good.
It's really important.
When I was young, I didn't have that connection.
The only stories I will get is when mum will go back.
Or my husband will go back.
But now I've been a few times.
What does that connection feel like for you to have now?
Is it a connection that you didn't have when you were younger?
What does it feel to have that now?
And to also provide it for other people?
It is really satisfying, the connection is.
It's keeping in touch with your roots.
And plus, we're trying to change lives of people.
We've got a good life here.
And those children did not have any education.
No school.
And it is really satisfactory.
That you can make a change in people's life.
And the project.
When we were asked to do something for the village.
And I'm not from the village.
Or my husband's not.
And it was just a pastor reached us.
And asked us if we can help.
Because they think people living abroad are rich.
And they can do anything.
But we said we will go back and find out.
And let you know.
So we took up this responsibility.
And God is always there to help us through.
Because fundraising is not an easy job.
And we are getting there.
And we got the building.
Which is really lovely.
And the children seeing their behavior.
Running around from the street.
To being, sitting down to get some education.
This we're changing for the country.
These children and changing their families.
It's really satisfying project.
And this, like I said.
All my friends.
Everybody I know.
Is always willing to help.
With fundraising.
Or anything they can do.
It's always there.
It's amazing.
Amazing to hear.
And that togetherness that you just mentioned.
Your friends and people that are around you here.
And also assisting you.
In fundraising.
This is without any religion.
Without any restrictions.
We are just friends.
We try to work for this community.
And speaking of work.
What type of jobs have you kind of had.
While you've been here in Newport?
I have worked in shops.
Like shop assistants.
I think little time in a factory as well.
Production factory.
But my main job.
Being in school.
As a language support worker.
And a under five development worker.
And I think that's where my real heart is.
To see children progress.
And get into life.
Education is the only way I believe.
To change people.
To give you progress.
And I've done a lot of.
Since I retired.
I'm a voluntary worker.
So.
Thank you.
And can you tell us a bit more about your family.
In terms of your husband.
And then how that came about.
And then growing up from there as well.
In terms of you being married.
Yes I was married at the age of 31.
And it was arranged marriage.
And we have lived happily since then.
And it's 47 years now.
And we have three daughters.
We have three girls.
Who are very successfully educated.
And.
Settling their life.
And six grandchildren.
Can be hurtful when they're together.
So then.
Balancing your work.
And family.
And being in this environment as well.
What kind of other things.
In terms of groups.
Or anything like that.
Did you start.
Being exposed to or did you start joining any groups.
Yeah.
So while you were here in Newport.
Basically I joined the groups when I retired.
And.
I was looking for where to go.
What to do.
I started to go into coffee and laugh at Eton Road.
And from there.
A friend.
Sookra.
Introduced me to Rachel Life.
And Rachel Life is a very.
Successful.
Very.
Friendly.
Satisfying.
It's like a family group now.
Because I've been going to it.
For about ten years.
So I can make a place.
And I'm a secretary for the group.
Once you're with Rachel Life.
You always got a job there.
They get you to do everything.
Roy.
Who runs Rachel Life.
Is a.
Person who gives his 100% to it.
And he expects everybody else to be.
Give their life to it.
But I do try my best.
And try to do what I can.
But it is a group that.
Everybody should join.
It's.
It's so satisfying.
It's given people a home.
Like.
Some people got nobody.
Once they join.
Rachel Life.
You got a family there.
You are really.
Friends with everybody.
Everybody's willing to help.
Fantastic.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
I don't know if there's anything.
Else that you would like to share at all.
Thank you.
That's all really.
JENNY GOJEAN- Yeah.
Wonderful.
Tell your heart so.
Speaker 3arleve you to video ok.
Speaker 3 You ready.
nen